*Josef 17-Mar 2021*
*WTF? LTF!*

Yesterday we had a discussion about the work that was done in LTF,
_the Lipid Task Force,_
and I realized 
that it is quite a lot of work 
that we managed in the past few weeks!
In today's post I would like to give you a glimpse into the kitchen...

First of all, let me thank Petteri for his work and effort he put into the task. 
He has performed a systematic series of AA reference simulations of alkanes of variable lengths,
in water as well as in melt, all in two force fields!
This gives us quite a dataset to benchmark the preogressed CG Martini 3 models of alkanes,
the future lipid tails! 
Interested in such simulations? 
You can take a look at them at the following Zenodo deposits

CHARMM: https://zenodo.org/record/4439036#.YABKztaxU5k
GROMOS: https://zenodo.org/record/4436834#.YABKRtaxU5k

and they are still on coarse at the time of writing.
/coarse/vainikka/lipid_task_force/alkanes


We have used the distributions from these AA reference simulation
to optimize the bonded parameters in the Martini 3 alkanes.
The updated parameters for e.g. C20 alkane (supposedly also known as "icosane")
is located at
https://gitlab.com/lipid-taskforce/martini3-lipids/-/blob/alkanes/top/martini_v3.0_alkanes_saturated.itp#L108
(It is in a private GitLab repository where LTF is progressed and which you shall have access to.)
The main points are:

- there are dihedral potentials, which are now coupled to angle bending
- bond lengths are longer at chain ends than in the middle segments and 
- all bond force constants are "softer"
- The modifications were necessary to represent the configurations from the atomistic reference model, namely the small preference for "cis" configuration of the carbohydrate chains (Who would expect that?)

Moreover, since we aim at making the *Martini 3 models modular,*
it is necessarry to design them like building blocks from the beginning. 
I have implemented this feature as _named bonded parameters,_
which are now maintained in a separate file _"martini3_ffbonded.itp"._ 
The benefit is that such parameters now form small building fragments,
which can now be reused in several places and molecules by just using their names.
This way, there is now a central place, the _ffbonded_ file, 
where the bonded parameters can be tuned for all molecules, 
where such parameters appear,
and at the same time, the parameters will be exactly the same in all those molecules 
without taking any special extra action
so that any future changes and fine-tuning from small test models 
will automatically propagate to the larger molecules created from such building blocks. 
How neat!
The _ffbonded_ file is currently being developed here:
https://gitlab.com/lipid-taskforce/martini3-lipids/-/blob/alkanes/top/martini_v3.0_ffbonded.itp

As an example and a test case,
I have implemented the above described design into a DPPC lipid, here
https://gitlab.com/lipid-taskforce/martini3-lipids/-/blob/1addab4689cc8514ace76316f0f924407631a0d9/top/martini_v3.0_phospholipids.itp#L566

You will notice that many explicit parameters were substituted for named bonded terms,
making the topology more _elegant_. 
For instance the newly added dihedral potentials are at the line 643:
https://gitlab.com/lipid-taskforce/martini3-lipids/-/blob/1addab4689cc8514ace76316f0f924407631a0d9/top/martini_v3.0_phospholipids.itp#L643

The form of the dihedral potential is complicated and coupled to the angle potentials 
to yield numerical stability 
(more information can be found in the Gromacs documentation, 
https://manual.gromacs.org/documentation/current/reference-manual/functions/bonded-interactions.html#fig-cbt). 
I have also tested this feature explicitly by running a very long simulation with such dihedral terms.
The simulation is numerically stable and its speed is undiminished compared to DPPC with no dihedral terms. 
Moreover, the resulting model "behaves well" in terms for membrane properties, 
e.g. the lipid surface area is well within error bars of the experimentally determined values
(Teal points in https://gitlab.com/lipid-taskforce/martini3-lipids/-/blob/alkanes/sim_tests/bilayer_properties/comparison_APL_sim-exp.png).
Smashing!

I would like to summarize this part soon in the next LTF blog post. 
The project, of course, continues 
and now we would like to investigate 
the mono-unsaturated and poly-unsaturated carbohydrates
as well as 
their attachment to the glycerol backbone.
The latter is already being sketched by using triglycerides as model compounds
(look e.g. here for more details https://gitlab.com/lipid-taskforce/martini3-lipids/-/blob/triglyceride_parameterization/sim_tests/triacylglycerols/TM_analysis_bond_angles_dihedrals.pdf)

👉 As always, contributions of any kind are welcome! 😉
There's lots to do, e.g. 
creating test simulations, 
writing topologies,
finding reference data and making reference simulations,
review of the work of others ....


Well, that's how things go! 
